this tutorial series is brought to you
by polygon make better renders faster
welcome to the last part of level one so
uh as the final step we are going to be
adding some materials to our icing and
donut and then doing a final render at
least final for level one to create just
a nice little cute squishy pink donut
so um with our icing selected i'm going
to the materials panel and i'm going to
add a new material
so
we
just touched briefly on it before but
this is where you change the properties
for a material and there are a lot of
properties
and it can be extremely daunting i know
as a beginner to like see all this and
go like oh my goodness how am i gonna
you know the good news is is you don't
need to know
most of this like especially as a
beginner there's only like two or three
things you change a lot
like even myself
i i like to think of oh here we go
spider utility thank you nice reminder
again i like to think i know blender but
i barely ever touch like anisotropic
sheen clear coat transmission mode like
i barely touch most of this there's
really only like two or three you touch
a lot so the first one is base color
which
is the base color of a material that's
the easiest way to say it it's uh
material can get very sciency but it's
the albedo uh side of a material it's
like the
underlying
yeah there's no way to explain it's just
it's the base color okay
it doesn't affect the reflection color
it doesn't affect bump it doesn't do
anything like that all it is is just
like the underlying color of a material
so we're going to make it look pink or
whatever you know i'm not here to tell
you what your donut should look like you
could give it blue icing
uh purple icing orange icing yellow
icing it's entirely up to you but i
happen to think that pink
uh icing looks kind of it's kind of nice
looks kind of delicious
so there we go all right
now the second
um
property that you change a lot for
materials is the roughness the roughness
defines
how reflective the material looks or how
sharp the reflection actually looks so
the lower value you go like if you go
all the way to zero it's almost like
it's a mirror it's completely sharp and
then as you go higher and higher you can
see that that reflection of the lamp
there becomes bigger and bigger and
bigger and if you go all the way to one
it looks almost as if it's made of chalk
and this is how you define how
reflective something looks
some people especially a lot of
beginners they think that the way to
turn off a reflection is to change the
specular value
and you can do that but it's it's
overriding
the
actual like physically accurate
properties of the real world because
every object in the real world actually
has reflection sounds crazy but even a
brick even chalk everything has
reflection um it's just it's so rough
that you almost can't see it but it's
still there so i would suggest not
touching specular or specular tin or
anything like that i would suggest just
leave it leave it as is and uh and just
change the roughness and if you want to
turn off reflection just crank it all
the way up to one
anyways in our case though we're making
this look like icing it helps to have a
reference of icing so i actually went
and bought a donut from the shops
and i put it on a plate here and i
filmed it for you so you can see how
reflective the icing looks the more
melted it looks like the fresher out of
the oven and freshly glazed it's going
to look wet right so that would be like
a low sharp value there
but i find like a value of about like
point three
point three four something like that
i think looks kind of good i think it
looks fine
uh okay so there's that and then for
most materials most materials um the
only other value that you change a lot
is like the normal value because that's
the bump so if you're adding like a
bumpy sort of surface or something
you would change that but you have to
have something to plug into it when we
get to more advanced materials in the
following levels we'll talk about that
but for for this thing we don't have any
bump we're just going to leave it as is
um
now because this is icing icing is
actually a kind of a rare type of
material in that
there is another property to it um and
that is called subsurface scattering so
you can see looking at this right now it
does look like icing but something seems
off about it like it almost looks like
it is too
hard right it looks like it's almost
made of concrete and the reason for that
is that looking at our reference of
realizing light isn't just hitting it
and bouncing off it light's actually
entering into it and it's bouncing
around
and that is very much similar to human
skin so real human skin um like it has
uh you can see it especially like on
like the corners of people's ears right
like with the sun behind them you see
like red red ears and that's because
it's like almost slightly translucent
and light is entering into the skin and
it's bouncing around and you get
different values well food actually has
this property as well so humans have it
some natural materials and like food
basically has this property so that's
this value here subsurface scattering so
if we increase this you can see
that it starts to i mean it looks
different looks a little weird but it
has that kind of fleshy quality to it
so
uh the one
value that you want to change is the
color of this by default it's set to
white so we could set this to
a pinkish reddish color
it actually there's very little
information online about how to actually
use subsurface color it's a it's a
little
it's kind of like a little out in the
open but my based on my tests i find
like giving it like a kind of a reddish
pink color is good but then also you've
got subsurface radius which defines how
far
the light actually bounces around inside
the object
and by default
and and here's the other thing there's
three values not just one value but
three because there's one for each
channel
red value green value and blue value
which is weird to me i don't get it i'm
sure there's a very scientific accurate
reason but anyways my advice for you
because the top one is the red red value
i would suggest setting that to like a
0.3 and then setting these others to 0.1
the green and the blue and then that
will give it like a reddish
reddish hint reddish tint to it
and uh and it'll go like it won't go too
far as well you don't want it to look
like wax which is what can happen if you
overdo the subsurface value
so actually that does kind of look a
little odd to me 0.25 perhaps
maybe this is a little bit too
something i don't know we can tweak
these values after we don't have to be
like locked into it right now but
somehow this is looking a little odd to
me
i know i went with like 0.3 for my final
one
but uh yeah this is this maybe i've got
0.15.15 for these other two values as
well that looks a little bit better just
a little bit more spread a little bit
more light coming through the donut
you know you can tweak these all day
0.3 yeah we got a little bit redder
nice okay
uh okay so that's the icing the icing
looks pretty darned good in the next
part we're going to put sprinkles on top
but for now we have some icing not bad
all right now for my uh by the way i've
been turning on and off this overlays
that's just like you know the camera
like the outline of selected objects if
i'm working on materials and things like
that i find it helpful to just turn it
off so that i can just focus on what i'm
doing but then in order to see what
you're selecting of course you want to
make sure you have it turned uh turned
on but anyways i have my uh donut
selected now so let's give the donut a
material
we are in the uh future parts we're
going to give this a proper material
like texture paint it and make it look
parts that are like white as well as
dark but just for now we're going to
give it the simplest material just to
make like a really quick
quick render and that's just to make it
look a little bit bready
a little bit orangey yellow
like so
and then the other thing i'll give it a
little bit of subsurf just a little bit
because it is food as well so bread has
light enter into it just a little bit
and i'll just make sure it's yellow
and then let's go 0.1.1
like so
all right
donut is looking donuty
so with my camera selected it's a little
far away from my donut so i'm gonna hit
g to move my camera and that'll move it
along you know
like i'm grabbing it and then i'm going
uh g and then middle mouse button
and then that'll just like you just push
the middle mouse once and it's like
moving it along
it's like forward front facing axis i
don't know but it's just how you move it
forward and back
uh what's the what's the term it's like
on a rail in not not pan
oh dolly that's the word i'm thinking of
for cameras it's like dollying it in and
out anyway
okay cool
so um we're gonna do a little render so
obviously for the final um
uh
whatever you call it final you know all
the way to level four we're going to put
like brick behind it do a coffee a plate
and all that kind of thing but just for
now just going to make a nice very
simple render for people that want to
end it right here
and it all ended like they're going to
commit suicide
this was the last thing you were going
to watch and then that that inspired you
all right that's a little dark anyway um
in this case what i want to do is i want
to have the light just a little bit
behind the donut but this is a case
where you can kind of see like
having like just a single view like this
like looking through my camera i want to
be able to move my light around but i
can't really do it from this view so
let's talk about splitting the view
to split the view in blender you just go
up to wherever there's a border and then
just right click it and then you've got
an option to vertical split or
horizontal split by the way i believe
this is a 2.81 feature because that's
the version i'm using right now if
you're following along with me you might
just have a like join or something like
that
like you might have to go to the like
this side and do it there but anyways so
we do a vertical split and then we have
a split and then over here i now have
just another window and i can move this
around and you can see that it's
interactively updating that one at the
same time
which is nice um there we go
the other way by the way if you want to
collapse or split something again if you
move to the very top right hand corner
this is kind of like the legacy way of
doing it but like your cursor changes to
like a little target symbol if you click
and drag that way it splits it and you
can do it this way as well and then if
you want to join them like collapse them
you just do it in the opposite direction
click and drag that way
so yeah
that's pretty good
the only other thing i'm going to do as
well is like the size of my lamp there
it looks a little bit like
sorry i'm going to split the view again
so that we can actually see the lamp
it looks a little bit like sunlight like
it looks a little bit too hard of light
source so i'm going to whoops not the
power the size of my light right there
you can see the larger i make this the
softer this shadow becomes if i turn off
my overlay i can focus on a little bit
better
you don't want to go too soft because
then it kind of like loses
emphasis or direction
uh but just something that's not looking
like sunlight um something like that and
i'll turn down the power just slightly
oh by the way now that we're talking uh
you know about doing a final render in
my like my full lighting series which if
you do get serious about cd i recommend
watching that because i go into a lot of
detail about this but
explain how you can actually find out
what the correct light value you should
be using because every monitor is
actually different and what looks okay
to you might look too dark or too bright
for somebody else so if you don't have
that thing that's been popping up
repeatedly as the spider i've got this
device which will like make my monitor
more accurate for color but if you don't
have one of those you don't need it
if you switch
in the render settings right here you've
got a color man underneath color
management you've got a view transform
if you change that to false color it'll
everything will look psychedelic but
these values here will tell you whether
something is overly bright or not and
really you want things to be at just
above
like just on gray or above gray so this
like top of this icing here is kind of
like what my focus is going to be so
looking at my lamp i'm just going to
turn that down
just a little bit like it can be a
little bit overexposed this this green
value here can be a little bit
overexposed but not too much
anyway that's enough that's enough for
now
and then before i do another render i'll
just um because i actually
think that uh blue blue for the ground
it looks okay
but i actually realized that you can use
uh if you make it like within this pink
pastel color we did split testing for
this tutorial we put some adverts up on
facebook to test you know what thumbnail
would actually perform best for this
tutorial
and um
yeah we did like some different ones
with like the background here and we did
we had ones that were blue and then
somewhat that were pink and the pink's
outperformed by a lot
um so yeah i guess like
it's up to you but based on my test it
seems like the aesthetic
looks uh it looks nicer when you have
like just pink on pink so that's what
i'm going to go with all right now
before we do a render i'm going to give
this a save
let's give this a save right now i just
hit ctrl shift s to do that save
and
all right now if we hit f12 right now
which is the shortcut for rendering
you'll see these tiles will appear it'll
go one by one by one and
yeah so i do have two tiles because i
have two graphics cards and i'm using
the gpu if you have cpu you might see
like eight tiles because it's going to
use the cores of the cpu to do it
but cpus are often generally slower than
graphics cards but anyways so
the speed at which it's doing this is
dependent on the number of samples so
the samples are defined right here so
the viewport is set to 32 by default so
you can see in the viewport here it's
quite noisy because we're rendering at
just 32 samples which is a very very low
sample amount the final render it's
doing at 128 which you can see is far
less noisy but when you zoom right in
you can still see there's quite a lot of
noise there
so
one way to reduce that is to just
increase that but every time like if you
were to double the samples and make it 2
right 256 samples that would kind of
like double the render time and you can
do that but yeah you wouldn't ever even
really clear up all the noise there
would always be like some noise there
thankfully there is something called
denoisers which after the render is
finished it can try to intelligently
read
where the um oh there it is
where the edges are and where some where
noise is and try to remove the noise um
and 2.8 blender 2.8 so if you're
watching this as i upload it make sure
you get this latest version from the
blender builder website
blender 2.81 has
a denoiser in it which is incredible
it's the intel ai denoiser
and the way you use it is you go to your
layer panel first and you make sure you
turn on denoising data and then when you
do that you have to do another render so
we'll do that quickly there we go and
then once the render is finished we're
going to go and this is you know for a
beginner tutorial it's a little advanced
but we're going to go to the compositor
so this compositor tab along the top
there
and this
is uh yeah it's everything that's going
to happen to your render after a render
is finished
and what you can do in here is you could
add in nodes that do things you could
add glow glare
you can do all sorts of things color
grading everything can happen in here
and uh yeah it's a little advanced but
just follow me for just this part and
later on in the future levels we'll talk
more about using nodes properly but just
for this it's really simple to do
we're going to hit shift a same hotkey
as the viewport and we're going to add
in a denoiser node
and since this is so new i actually just
realized i don't even know which menu
it's under but you can do a search
you can type in denoise so
with this all we need to do is take the
output of the
excuse me noisy image
put that into the image part
the denoiser denoising normal the purple
goes in the purple
and then the denoising albedo goes into
the albedo and then we take that and we
put that into the composite
uh input right there
now when we do that if we were to hit
f11 um f11 by the way is the hotkey to
bring up the old render the the most
recent render nothing has actually
changed because uh when you do i don't
know why they changed this in blender it
really annoyed me like
it won't actually affect the final
render unless it's viewable
as you're using the compositor you could
do another render right now and it would
actually kick into gear but in order
like if i don't want to have to do
another render i can just go to the
image editor down here
set this to render result
and then if i
take this out and put this back in it
will actually refresh it do the full
render and now uh control space by the
way will make maximize any view that
your mouse is over so control space
bring that up and now as we zoom in you
can see it's cleared up all that noise
as if it were magic
and uh it's really really powerful this
intel denoiser
and as far as i know it will work on
even amd processors as far as i know
maybe that'll change in the future i
don't know when intel catches on to what
the amd users are up to but uh it's
really really super impressive blender
had a denoiser previously and it did it
quite immediately it was yeah it was
easier to use but it was really like
didn't do anywhere near as good a result
as this um so yeah
there we go guys so that is the end of
level one you made it yay
so uh
thank you for watching go ahead and uh
share it with your friends if you found
this helpful and help them get into
blender but i hope you will continue the
rest of this series as we add in
sprinkles we'll learn about particles
we'll learn about displacement making
the doughnut look
more like
textured bumpy donuts adding in bumps
as well as texture painting painting on
textures and then doing precise modeling
for the coffee cup and then final
renders and animation as well to the end
so it's a big series and it's designed
to give you that full scope of what
you're going to need to know in blender
so i hope you will join me in the next
level go ahead and click here if you're
ready to start watching now